README.md, before:

# Leetcode, Data Structures, and Algorithms (with tests)

A collection of my solutions to Leetcode problems, with reference to various algorithms and data structures. Each solution also includes Jest tests to help internalise Test-Driven Development (TDD) as a habit within my workflow.

## Merge Sort

Basic O(nlog(n)) solution involving recursion to split, and two pointers to compare, sort, and merge back together.

## Maximum Subarray problem (\#53)

**Kadane's Algorithm**  
Using Kadane's algorithm to keep track of the 'global maximum value' by replacing it each time the 'local maximum value' exceeds it. This method results in a single iteration over the full array of unknown length, making the time complexity O(n), and one of the most efficient ways to solve the problem.

**Divide and Conquer**  
Using recursion to split the array into a left, right, and center section, then find the maximum sum from each. They are then compared and the max of the three is returned recursively. This specific solution runs in O(nlog(n)) time as it operates on the same recursive principle as merge sort. A short paper from the University of Texas suggests changes to this method to make it competitive with Kadane's algorithm, and running in O(n) time. (https://personal.utdallas.edu/~daescu/maxsa.pdf)

## Add Two Binary Strings (\#67)

Given two binary strings, return their sum as a binary string. O(n) solution which uses a simple addition with carrying approach, based on the knowledge that (including carried values) the sum of each pair of indexes can only be 0, 1, 2 or 3.

## Climbing Stairs (\#70)

You are climbing stairs, it takes n steps to reach the top. Each time you step you can either climb 1 or 2 steps, in how many distinct ways can you reach the top. On closer inspection, the number of distinct combinations of steps for n is equal to those of n-1+n-2 (e.g. n=4 output=5, n=3 output=3, n=2 output=2. 2+3=5). This is the same pattern followed by the Fibonacci sequence. This problem is essentially asking; Find the nth Fibonacci number. Solved in O(n) by building the sequence and returning the nth index.

Commit message:

update longest substring problem added to readme

README.md, after:

# Leetcode, Data Structures, and Algorithms (with tests)

A collection of my solutions to Leetcode problems, with reference to various algorithms and data structures. Each solution also includes Jest tests to help internalise Test-Driven Development (TDD) as a habit within my workflow.

## Merge Sort

Basic O(nlog(n)) solution involving recursion to split, and two pointers to compare, sort, and merge back together.

## Maximum Subarray problem (\#53)

**Kadane's Algorithm**  
Using Kadane's algorithm to keep track of the 'global maximum value' by replacing it each time the 'local maximum value' exceeds it. This method results in a single iteration over the full array of unknown length, making the time complexity O(n), and one of the most efficient ways to solve the problem.

**Divide and Conquer**  
Using recursion to split the array into a left, right, and center section, then find the maximum sum from each. They are then compared and the max of the three is returned recursively. This specific solution runs in O(nlog(n)) time as it operates on the same recursive principle as merge sort. A short paper from the University of Texas suggests changes to this method to make it competitive with Kadane's algorithm, and running in O(n) time. (https://personal.utdallas.edu/~daescu/maxsa.pdf)

## Add Two Binary Strings (\#67)

Given two binary strings, return their sum as a binary string. O(n) solution which uses a simple addition with carrying approach, based on the knowledge that (including carried values) the sum of each pair of indexes can only be 0, 1, 2 or 3.

## Climbing Stairs (\#70)

You are climbing stairs, it takes n steps to reach the top. Each time you step you can either climb 1 or 2 steps, in how many distinct ways can you reach the top? On closer inspection, the number of distinct combinations of steps for n is equal to those of n-1+n-2 (e.g. n=4 output=5, n=3 output=3, n=2 output=2. 2+3=5). This is the same pattern followed by the Fibonacci sequence. This problem is essentially asking; Find the nth Fibonacci number. Solved in O(n) by building the sequence and returning the nth index.

## Longest Substring Without Repeating Characters (\#3)

Given a string, s, find the length of the longest substring without repeating characters. Similar to the maximum subarray problem, and can be solved in a similar way in O(n) time. This can be achieved by looping over the string once, and keeping track of the start and end of a range of letters, increasing the range by 1 each time to the right. If the next included letter is already in the string, then move the left bound up to that letter. If the string range length is greater than any string range length seen so far, replace that value with the new greatest value. (Sliding window approach).
